[Documentation](../../README.md) > [Programming](../README.md) > [Tutorials](../Tutorials.md)

## Tutorial 3 : Libraries

### Hello, world! Redux

In the previous tutorial we output some text using the most low level tools available. The Standard Test Host includes a source library that we can use to make this easier.

Edit the existing Project File and update the sources section as follows:

```json
{
    "target": {
        "name": "Tutorial",
        "version": "1.0.0",
        "description": "My first MC64K application",
        "output": "tutorial.64x",
        "host": {
            "name": "Standard Test Host",
            "version": "1.0.0"
        }
    },
    "sources": [
        "lib:standard_test_host/v1.0.0/host.s",
        "lib:standard_test_host/v1.0.0/io.s",
        "src/main.s"
    ]
}
```

---
**Note:**

* Files are assembled in the strict order that they appear in the `sources` section.
* The assembler interprets any source path beginning with `lib:` as a common library path.

---
Edit the existing main.s file and update as follows:

```asm
; Hello world
main:
    lea     .hello_string, a0
    hcf     io_print_string
exit:
    rts

.hello_string:
    dc.b "Hello, world!\n\0"
```

Assemble this and if all goes to plan, it should work exactly as before. We've done away with a lot of boilerplate:

* The host.s library file defines the expected `@export` pair for `main` and `exit` (and much else) so that this is no longer necessary for us to do.
* The io.s library file wraps all the HCF Vector 0 IO functionality behind a set of simple global function labels that can be called directly.
* For more information, see the [documentation](../../../assembler/libs/standard_test_host/v1.0.0/README.md) for the library.

### Take your positions!

The example code uses `bsr` for calling the function. Developers familiar with 680x0 code may be surprised that `jsr` is not used here. Changing this to use `jsr` also works. So why the difference?

* In MC64K applications compile to a single binary file in which the code block is a single entity.
* Branch displacements are 32 bit signed:
    - For an executable of any realistic size, all code addresses are reachable by branch displacement.
* The `bsr` operation has no effective address decode logic and is therefore faster than `jsr` for these use cases.
    - `jsr` is still useful when we want to take the address of a function to call later.

[<< Prev](./p_02.md) | [Next>>](p_04.md)
